# Methods

## VR Setup

The VR-environments were presented using a wireless HTC VIVE head-mounted
display (HMD). The setup provided a 110° field of view, a 90 Hz refresh rate
and a resolution of 1440 × 1600 Pixel per eye. Participants had an area of
about 6 m2 open space to navigate the virtual environment. For the execution of
the behavioral tasks and additional movement control participants held one
VR-controller in their dominant hand. The VR-software was run on a PC with the
following specifications: CPU: Intel Core i7-3600, Memory: 32.0 GB RAM,
Windows 10, GPU: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 (Ti). The VR-environments themselves
were designed in Unity. Auditory stimuli were presented using on-ear headphones.

## VR Environments

The two VR-environments both consisted of a starting area and an experimental
area. The starting area was the same for both VR-environments. It consisted of
a small rural shopping street and a small park. Participants heard low street
noises. The area was designed for familiarization with the VR-setup and the
initial exploration phase. The experimental area of the environments differed
for the two environments. For the VR neutral environment it contained a small
café with a buffet. Participants could hear low conversations and music. The
gambling-related environment (VR gambling) contained a small casino with slot
machines and a sports betting area. The audio backdrop was the sound of slot
machines and sports. The floorplan of both of these experimental areas was
identical but mirrored for the café. Both experimental areas additionally
included eight animated human avatars. These avatars performed steady and
non-repetitive behaviors like gambling and ordering food for the
gambling-related and neutral environments, respectively. Both experimental
areas (café and casino) had entrances located at the same position within the
starting area of the VR-environments, which were marked by corresponding signs.

## Experimental Procedure

During the three sessions participants either explored one of two different VR
environments (VR-sessions) followed by the completion of two behavioral tasks.
Within the VR-environments participants first explored the starting area for
5 min (first exploration phase). After these five minutes participants were
asked to enter the experimental area of the environment (either the café or the
casino). Participants were instructed to explore the interior experimental area
for five minutes (second exploration phase). Each of the three phases was later
binned into five one-minute intervals and labeled as B (1 to 5) for the baseline
phase, F (1 to 5) for the first exploration phase and S (1 to 5) for the second
exploration phase. After the second exploration phase participants were asked to
proceed to a terminal within the VR-environment on which the behavioral tasks
were presented.

## Behavioral Tasks

Participants performed the same two behavioral tasks with slightly varied
rewards and choices in each of the three sessions: a temporal discounting task
and a 2-step sequential decision-making task. Results from the 2-step task will
be reported separately. In the temporal discounting task participants had to
repeatedly choose between an immediately available (smaller-but-sooner, SS)
monetary reward of 20 Euros and larger-but-later (LL) temporally delayed
monetary rewards. The LL options were multiples of the SS option (range 1.025
to 3.85) combined with different temporal delays (range 1 to 122 days). We
constructed three sets of six delays and 16 LL options. Each set had the same
mean delay and the same mean LL option. Combining each delay with every LL
option within each set resulted in three sets of 96 trials. The order of
presentation of the trial sets was counter balanced across participants and
sessions. All temporal discounting decisions were hypothetical. In the
VR-version of the task two yellow squares were presented to the participants.
One depicted the smaller offer of 20 Euros now, while the other depicted the
delayed larger offer. For the lab based testing session were presented in the
same way except that the color scheme was white writing on a black background.
Offers were randomly assigned to the left/right side of the display and
presented until a decision was made. The next trial started 0.5 to 1 s after
the decision. Participants indicated their choice by aiming the 
VR-controller at the preferred option and pulling the trigger.
